Mel Filterbanks Energies (MFE) and Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) (#4144)
mlpack/mlpack: doc/user/core/transforms/signal_processing.md

    can add them here as well.
-->

## `MFE()` and `MFCC()`

 - `MFE(signal, sampleRate, output)`
   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies from `signal` using default parameters.

 - `MFE(signal, sampleRate, output, numMelFilters, windowLength, windowStep,
   nFFT, lowFreq, highFreq)`
   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies depending on the user specified
     parameters .

 - `MFCC(signal, sampleRate, output)`
   * Extract 13 MFCC coefficients from `signal` with default parameters.

 - `MFCC(signal, sampleRate, output, numCoeffs, numMelFilters, windowLength,
   windowStep, nFFT, lowFreq, highFreq)`
   * Extract MFCC with different number coefficients dependings on the user specified
     parameters.

<!-- @rcurtin the table is a proposal I followed the same concept in
decision_tree.md, I think it is easier to use when we have several parameters,
please let me know what you think -->

### Functions Parameters:

<!-- @rcurtin, I was thinking of adding another column which is the value
ranges, I think most users will use the default values, but if someone would
like to change them they need to know that the highFreq cannot be 100 KHz

> especially if they do not have any background in audio processing. -->

Reviewer: Maybe just a note in the description works too?  Like "typically less than 100k"?

keyword spotting, and other audio related piplines.

 - **MFE** (Mel-Frequency Energy): log-scaled energies from a bank of
   triangular filters spaced on the mel scale.
 - **MFCC** (Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients): a compact representation
   obtained by applying a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to the MFE output.

MFCC is a superset of MFE, the MFE pipeline produces the first step as an
intermidiate representation, and a single additional DCT step to generate MFCC
coefficients.

#### See also:

 * [Audio data loading and saving](#audio-data)
 * [Mel-frequency cepstrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel-frequency_cepstrum)
 * [MFCC tutorial (Practical Cryptography)](http://practicalcryptography.com/miscellaneous/machine-learning/guide-mel-frequency-cepstral-coefficients-mfccs/)
 * [The cepstrum, mel-cepstrum, and MFCCs (Aalto University)](https://speechprocessingbook.aalto.fi/Representations/Melcepstrum.html)

<!-- 
    @rcurtin, I have the links for a couple of very good youtube videos that
    helped explaining all the steps for the algorithm, if you would like, we
    can add them here as well.
-->

> ## `MFE()` and `MFCC()`

Reviewer: I think we should split the `MFE` and `MFCC` documentation, just for the sake of clarity---they are two different, techniques, even if they are very related.

Author: They will have the same function signature and the same parameters. 
This means I would need to copy the parameter table again, which is fine, but it might be confusing for the user

Reviewer: I don't think it's a problem to have two copies of that table.  I think users will only tend to look at the documentation specifically for the function they care about, so I think it is actually more risky to have one table for both functions... a user might look at `MFE()`, not immediately see the table, and assume there is no documentation for it.

 - `MFE(signal, sampleRate, output)`
   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies from `signal` using default parameters.

 - `MFE(signal, sampleRate, output, numMelFilters, windowLength, windowStep,
   nFFT, lowFreq, highFreq)`
   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies depending on the user specified
     parameters .

 - `MFCC(signal, sampleRate, output)`
   * Extract 13 MFCC coefficients from `signal` with default parameters.

 - `MFCC(signal, sampleRate, output, numCoeffs, numMelFilters, windowLength,
   windowStep, nFFT, lowFreq, highFreq)`
   * Extract MFCC with different number coefficients dependings on the user specified
     parameters.

<!-- @rcurtin the table is a proposal I followed the same concept in
decision_tree.md, I think it is easier to use when we have several parameters,

> please let me know what you think -->

Reviewer: Yeah, I agree, I think it's fine like you have it.  One thing I would suggest is to add a couple bullet points discussing the expected input shape and output shape; I'm not sure all users will scroll down to the table to get that information.  (That does duplicate information... that's ok, not a huge issue in my opinion.)

### Functions Parameters:

<!-- @rcurtin, I was thinking of adding another column which is the value
ranges, I think most users will use the default values, but if someone would
like to change them they need to know that the highFreq cannot be 100 KHz
especially if they do not have any background in audio processing. -->

|     **name**     |  **type**   |   **default**  | **description**                                  |
|------------------|-------------|----------------|--------------------------------------------------|

> | `signal`         | `arma::mat` | _(N/A)_ | Raw PCM audio samples.                                  |

Reviewer: So what about if the user loaded an audio file that has multiple channels?  Wouldn't we need a function to split the channels into separate columns of a matrix?

In fact, if you wanted, we could go back and change the loading API so that each channel was loaded into a row of a matrix (so e.g. the format would be `signal.row(0)` is channel 0, `signal.row(1)` is channel 1, etc., etc.).  Maybe it makes more sense to load like that, so that a user can pass a signal here with multiple channels and get back MFCCs for each channel?  I suppose the output size might be `numMelFilters * channels` rows and `numWindows` columns.

There are lots of ways we can solve this issue, I'm just tossing out one proposal here.  Let me know what you think.

Author: Actually, the user needs to combine these channels; A way to do it is to take both (L + R) /2.
I have this on my list to implement a function for N channels, and I will add support for it in another PR later. It will be necessary when building a full training pipeline, but this is not related to MFE / MFCC itself

Reviewer: That's not the only way you could compute these features; it's one way (and a reasonable way) but you could totally reasonably build a set of features for each channel.

If you want to leave it in this PR that the input signal must have only one channel, then we should put that here now, even if we intend to change it later.  (Otherwise a user will come, load data according to the documentation in the load wav PR, and the first thing they will try to do is put the data directly into MFE/MFCC and get really bad results because the channel data is interleaved.)

Author: Okay, I will add a function in this PR to combine the channels. In this case, we need to highlight that in one of the examples to show that when we have two channels, we need to combine them :+1:

Reviewer: It would be great if you could add a function to combine the channels.  But, that's not the only way that the user could handle the situation.  Really I think we just need to document to the user that we expect that each column's samples are not interleaved; do you agree with that?

I looked at the implementation of `MFE()`, and what it expects is that each column of the input represents a separate audio signal.  So you could very easily say, I have two-channel audio, I want to treat each channel as a different signal.  In this case, their input would be of size `numChannels` x `numSamples`, and if I understand the code right, the output would be of size `numMelFilters ` x `(numWindows * numChannels)`.  Is that correct?

Author: Depends on what the user wants, not what we want.

If the user does not care about the spatial information, then it does not make sense to separate both of them. For example, if you would like to do speech recognition, then mixing them and converting N channels to one channel would be the right approach.

If the user wants to preserve the spatial information, like building a model related to speaker identification, because each speaker sits in a different area (one on the left and the other on the right), then the right approach would be exactly what you are proposing, which is to separate each channel into a separate column.

In the documentation would be great to simply highlight what you are saying, but also mention the application for it, because the user might not be aware of what the right approach is to input the audio signal to MFE / MFCC. 

I would even say that it would be better to add two examples in the documentation, one showing how to mix (L + R) / 2, and the other showing how to separate the signal of N channels into N columns. It should be simple to extract 2 channels by simply separating the odd and the even indices. 

Your assessment of the code is correct. The current MFE implementation does process each column as a separate signal.

Author: I added what is missing to be done here in notes

| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(N/A)_ | Sample rate of the audio in Hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`). |
| `output`         | `arma::mat` | _(N/A)_ | Output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`.  |
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | Number of mel-spaced triangular filters.                |
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | Window length in milliseconds.                          |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | Window hop (step) in milliseconds.                      | 
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | FFT size; `0` means the number of points fed to FFT is chosen automatically using the next power of 2 >= of the window length. |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | Low frequency bound for the mel filterbank in Hz.       |
| `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | High frequency bound in Hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. |

***Note:*** Different types can be used for `signal` (e.g., `arma::fmat`, `arma::imat`).
However the signal needs to be represented in floating points. Therefore, if
MFE / MFCC filter is intended to be used, it is prefered to load the signal as

> a floating point.

Reviewer: What do you mean here?  If the function does not work with integer types, then we should just say that you can use different types for `signal`, but the element type of the matrix has to be a floating-point type.  I think that's a reasonable restriction.

Since users might load their data into integral types, it might also be worth a quick note, saying something like "if the audio signal was loaded as an integral type, you can either change the loading code to load directly into a floating-point type matrix, or use conv_to to convert to a floating-point type, then scale the range to [-1, 1].

---

Apply MFE filter with default parameters on voice signals:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::mat mfe;
mlpack::MFE(signal, opts.SampleRate(), mfe);

std::cout << "MFE shape: " << mfe.n_rows << " x " << mfe.n_cols << std::endl;

> 

Reviewer: Do you think we could make these examples a little more compelling by, I dunno, printing the first 5 MFE values or something like this?  It would also be nice if each example did something different with the outputs.  For now these four examples are pretty formulaic---for instance, the second one is basically just exactly the first but with some extra options specified.

Author: I know, this is a placeholder, I will improve them a bit more, no worries.
What would be great is to have an end-to-end example, but maybe this would be better for a tutorial

Reviewer: Agreed; we can maybe throw an end-to-end example into the examples repository when one is ready, then link to it from this documentation?

> # Signal processing

Reviewer: If we are going to rename the page, I think we need to update sidebar.html too.

Author: Agreed, because it they are really signal processing and not preprocessing

mlpack provides several signal processing techniques that allows to extract
features from non stationary non linear variable frequency signals and from

> stationary linear signals convering the following techniques:

Reviewer: I think it would be possible to shorten this a bit, but I'm not sure the exact specifics you are going for.  Do you think maybe the much simpler

```
features from variable-frequency signals:
```

could work?  Or is that too simple?  Maybe

```
features from stationary and non-stationary signals:
```

* Transformation: provided with `arma::fft()` and `mlpack::DCT()`.
* Decomposition: provided with `mlpack::EMD()`.

> * Feature Extraction: provided with `mlpack::MFE()` and `mlpack::MFCC()`.

Reviewer: I'd suggest sub-bullet points for each function here, like this:

```
 * _Transformations:_
   - `mlpack::DCT()`: discrete cosine transformation
...
```

so that it's easy to see the functionality with one function per line.  I also don't think that documenting Armadillo's `fft()` function is necessary.

Author: I am still unsure whether we want to add DCT. Let's add it later, since the public API needs to be defined. Currently, it is designed to create a matrix and then multiply by MFE.

Author: I was like it could be a good idea, and then when I was looking at the code, I was a bit not sure how we need to interface with the function

Reviewer: That works, let's save it for another time then. I agree the interface would need some thought. In this case we have few enough signal processing functions that we should probably keep it just as a list, not a grouped list, like

 - MFE(): ...
 - MFCC(): ...
 - EMD(): ...
 - EEMD(): ...

(whatever ordering works for you, I'm just sketching the idea quickly on my phone)

Author: I kept it partially in the same way, let me know if this is okay, or not

Reviewer: Yeah, it seems fine, but do you think you can integrate the bullet points from the `EMD` section below?  One function per sub-bullet-point makes it really easy to add news functions.  So something like this:

```
 * _Decompositions_:
   - `EMD()`: adaptively decomposes a 1D signal ...
 * _Transformations_:
   - `MFE()`: ...
   - `MFCC()`: ...
```

Author: I took note of exposing DCT to our users as a part of our public API.

</p>

Example using `EMD` on a time-varying signal `S`.

```c++
const arma::uword N = 400;
const double tMin = 0.0;
const double tMax = arma::datum::pi;
arma::vec time = arma::linspace(tMin, tMax, N);

// signal = sin(20*T*(1 + 0.2*T)) + T**2 + sin(13*T)
// see figure above 
arma::vec signal =
    arma::sin( 20.0 * time % (1.0 + 0.2 * time) ) +
    arma::square(time) + arma::sin(13.0 * time);

arma::mat imfs;
arma::vec residue;

// Use up to 5 IMFs, 50 sifts per IMF, tol = 1e-6
mlpack::EMD(signal, imfs, residue, 5, 50, 5e-6);

// Print dominant frequency for the first 3 IMFs 
// to check if EMD is extracting the correct IMFs
const size_t numToShow = std::min<size_t>(3, imfs.n_cols);
const double dt = time(1) - time(0);
const double fs = 1.0 / dt;
for (size_t k = 0; k < numToShow; ++k)
{
  arma::cx_vec spectrum = arma::fft(imfs.col(k));
  // Use only the first half of the spectrum
  arma::vec mag = arma::abs(spectrum.rows(0, spectrum.n_elem / 2));
  arma::uword idx = mag.index_max();
  const double peakHz = (double) idx * fs / spectrum.n_elem;
  std::cout << "IMF " << k << " peak freq: " << peakHz << " Hz" << std::endl;
}
```

> ## Audio Feature Extraction

Reviewer: I think it's better to break these into two separate sections: one for MFE, one for MFCC, just like we are doing with EMD and EEMD.  The textual descriptions of each algorithm can definitely reference the other implementation too, since they are closely related.  I know this will duplicate some of the documentation (including the parameter tables, for instance), but I think that's okay: to me it seems better to keep the function-level documentation as short and self-contained as possible.

   obtained by applying a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to the MFE output.

MFCC is a superset of MFE, the MFE pipeline produces the first step as an
intermidiate representation, and a single additional DCT step to generate MFCC
coefficients.

#### See also:

 * [Audio data loading and saving](#audio-data)
 * [Mel-frequency cepstrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel-frequency_cepstrum)
 * [MFCC tutorial (Practical Cryptography)](http://practicalcryptography.com/miscellaneous/machine-learning/guide-mel-frequency-cepstral-coefficients-mfccs/)
 * [The cepstrum, mel-cepstrum, and MFCCs (Aalto University)](https://speechprocessingbook.aalto.fi/Representations/Melcepstrum.html)
 * [Mel-Spectrogram and MFCCs | Lecture 72 (Part 1) | Applied Deep Learning](https://github.com/maziarraissi/Applied-Deep-Learning/blob/main/06%20-%20Speech%20%26%20Music/01%20-%20Recognition.pdf)

## `MFE()`

 - `MFE(signal, sampleRate, output)`
   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies from `signal` using default parameters.

 - `MFE(signal, sampleRate, output, numMelFilters, windowLength, windowStep,
   nFFT, lowFreq, highFreq)`
   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies depending on the user specified

>      parameters.

Reviewer: Three thoughts:

 * The user can pass multiple signals, right?  So shouldn't the parameter be called `signals` and the documentation of matrix shapes updated accordingly?
 * You could combine both overloads and just write the default values of the parameters in the arguments, `numMelFilters=40, windowLength=25.0, ...`.
 * It would probably be good to add a bullet point or two on the required `sampleRate` parameters and the size of `output` after processing.  I know these things are covered in the parameters table, but the way I see it is that a user should mostly get the idea of everything in the bullet points here, and then refer to the parameters table for absolute precision on types and so forth.  (At least, that is how I have generally written and reviewed other documentation.)

| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | sample rate of the audio in hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`).        |
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | number of mel-spaced triangular filters. Typical range (`20` to `100`) |
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | window length in milliseconds.  Typical range (`20` to `40`)           |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | window hop (step) in milliseconds. Typical range (`5` to `20`)         |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | fft size; `0` means the number of points fed to fft is chosen automatically using the next power of 2 >= of the window length. Typical range (`256` to `4096`) |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | low frequency bound for the mel filterbank in hz. Typical range (`0` to `300`) |
| `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | high frequency bound in hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range (`4000` to sampleRate / 2) |

***Note:*** if the audio signal was loaded as an integral type, you can either
change the loading code to load directly into a floating-point type matrix, or

> use conv_to to convert to a floating-point type, then scale the range to [-1, 1]

Reviewer: I think this should actually be mentioned up higher, perhaps in the bullet points for the method.  You can also modify the parameters table to have the type not as `arma::mat` but as "`arma::mat` or other [floating-point matrix](../matrices.md#representing-data-in-mlpack)".

# Signal processing

mlpack provides several signal processing techniques that allows to extract
features from stationary and non-stationary signals:

* _Decomposition_:
    - `EMD()`: adaptively decomposes a 1D signal into a set of Intrinsic Mode
 Functions (IMFs) plus a residue.
    - `EEMD():` wraps `EMD()` to output more robust IMFs by using ensemble
      approach.

* _Feature Extraction_: 
    - `MFE()`: (Mel-Frequency Energy): log-scaled energies from a bank of
   triangular filters spaced on the mel scale
    - `MFCC()`: (Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients): a compact representation

>    obtained by applying a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to the MFE output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`EMD()`](#emd) (Empirical Mode Decomposition): adaptively decomposes a 1D signal into a set of Intrinsic Mode
 Functions (IMFs) plus a residue.
    - [`EEMD():`](#eemd) (Ensemble EMD): wraps `EMD()` to output more robust IMFs by using ensemble
      approach.

* _Feature Extraction_: 
    - [`MFE()`](#mfe) (Mel-Frequency Energy): log-scaled energies from a bank of
   triangular filters spaced on the mel scale
    - [`MFCC()`](#mfcc) (Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients): a compact representation
   obtained by applying a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to the MFE output.
```

Some really minor cleanups here, I thought it would be a good idea to link to each subsection.

   * Number of extracted IMFs will be the minimum number of IMFs extracted by
     by `EMD()` across all `ensSize` runs (`<=maxImfs`).

   * EEMD may produce low-energy leading IMFs due to injected noise and ensemble
   averaging. Depending on the application, users may want to discard negligible
   IMFs in post-processing (e.g., using an energy-fraction threshold).

   * The number of returned IMFs is bounded between `0` and `maxImfs`.
     The algorithm returns only as many IMFs as can actually be extracted from
     the input signal.

Example using `EEMD` on a time-varying signal `S` (shown in above EMD figure).

```c++
const arma::uword N = 3000;
const double tMin = 0.0;
const double tMax = arma::datum::pi;
arma::vec time = arma::linspace(tMin, tMax, N);

// signal = sin(20*T*(1 + 0.2*T)) + T**2 + sin(13*T)
// see figure above in the EMD documentation
arma::vec signal =
    arma::sin( 20.0 * time % (1.0 + 0.2 * time) ) +
    arma::square(time) + arma::sin(13.0 * time);

arma::mat imfs;
arma::vec residue;

// Use 100 ensemble members, 0.15 noise strength, 10 IMFs, 50 sifts per IMF, tol = 1e-2
mlpack::EEMD(signal, imfs, residue, 100, 0.15, 10, 50, 1e-2);

> ```

Reviewer: I think that the EMD and EEMD documentation is using an old version from the EEMD PR.  Can you update this to use the version available in the master branch?

Reviewer: @shrit can you handle this issue?  If we merge as-is, then we will mistakenly change the EMD documentation to an old version.  To avoid bouncing back and forth so much on this PR, I would appreciate if you could take a look through all unresolved comments and make sure that they are all addressed.

Author: Definitely, and sorry for forgetting this one.
I have run a full diff on these two files; the main difference is the links and a couple of headers that were removed on the master branch.
Note that in the EEMD section, I re-worked the introduction wording to better match what EEMD is doing. I must have done that during the review of the EEMD. Sorry for this.

## MFE

mlpack provides the `MFE()` functions to extract standard audio
features from raw PCM data loaded with [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).  These features are
used as input to machine learning models for speech recognition, speaker identification,
keyword spotting

#### See also:

 * [Audio data loading and saving](../../load_save.md#audio-data)
 * [Mel-frequency cepstrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mel-frequency_cepstrum)
 * [MFCC tutorial (Practical Cryptography)](http://practicalcryptography.com/miscellaneous/machine-learning/guide-mel-frequency-cepstral-coefficients-mfccs/)
 * [The cepstrum, mel-cepstrum, and MFCCs (Aalto University)](https://speechprocessingbook.aalto.fi/Representations/Melcepstrum.html)

>  * [Mel-Spectrogram and MFCCs | Lecture 72 (Part 1) | Applied Deep Learning](https://github.com/maziarraissi/Applied-Deep-Learning/blob/main/06%20-%20Speech%20%26%20Music/01%20-%20Recognition.pdf)

Reviewer: This does not render right, see http://ci.mlpack.org/job/mlpack%20documentation%20link%20check/job/PR-4144/19/Build_20documentation/user/core/transforms/signal_processing.html#mfe

> ## `MFE()`

Reviewer: There's no need to have an `MFE()` subsection under the `MFE()` section.  Do you think you can structure this like the EMD and EEMD documentation?  Those follow this structure:

 * Quick text description
 * Function signature
 * Bullet points describing functionality
 * Notes/caveats
 * Visual description (if that went with the quick text description I think that's ok too)
 * Examples
 * See also

In your case there are enough parameters for parameter tables, I'd suggest putting them right before the examples.

Author: Usually, in other mlpack documentation, we add the `See also` section under the Quick text description. Up to you if you want me to keep this change or revert, for the others I will check

Reviewer: Wherever you want to put the 'see also' is fine with me, but still if you can generally structure it along those lines I'd appreciate it for consistency.  Whatever the structure, there's definitely no need for a secondary `MFE()` anchor though.

 - `MFE(signals, output, sampleRate, numMelFilters=40, windowLength=25,

>    windowStep=10, nFFT=0, lowFreq=0.0, highFreq=0.0)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `MFE(signals, output, sampleRate, numMelFilters=40, windowLength=25, windowStep=10, nFFT=0, lowFreq=0.0, highFreq=0.0)`
```
A line wrap causes this to render wrong.

   * Extract log-mel filterbank energies.

   * `signals` input matrix contains a columm wise represented signals.
   
   * `mfe` output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`

>    * `sampleRate` provided by `AudioOptions` after loading audio data.

Reviewer: It would probably be clearer to do something like this:

```
 * Extract log-Mel filterbank energies from windows of audio in `signals`, storing the result in `mfe`.

 * `signals` should be a matrix with floating-point elements and shape `numSamples` x `numSignals`, and `mfe` will be set to shape `numMelFilters` x `(numWindows * numSignals)`.
   - To perform `MFE()` on non-floating point audio signals, first convert the data to a floating-point matrix type (e.g. using [`arma::conv_to`](link)).

 * `sampleRate` can be set using the members of an [`AudioOptions`](link to audio options subsection) populated during a call to [`Load()`](link).
```

There are some other problems I have not tried to solve in this documentation:

 - There is no high-level description of how MFE works, or mention of STFT or windowing.  That means `numWindows` is left undefined.
 - A picture of what we are doing in the frequency domain would be hugely valuable in explaining this.  Maybe you might have a different idea but I think one picture to show what windowing is plus one picture to show the triangular Mel filterbanks would be really helpful.

I agree that a user who already knows what MFE is will be fine with this, and a user who has no idea what MFE is will have problems.  But I want to focus our documentation on users who *sort of* know what MFE is; those are the ones we need to help.

About the interleaving, I would put this as its own `NOTE:` below the bullet points to draw attention to it.  But, there is another problem here: we do not tell the user anything about how to de-interleave their audio, or give them any link to other reference for that.  As I wrote somewhere else, if we modify `Load()` to load audio signals with each channel as its own column, this problem goes away, since the audio is already loaded in a de-interleaved manner.  It's really important we resolve this problem in one way or another, otherwise we are basically hanging users out to dry: they will load a multichannel audio file then try to call `MFE()` or `MFCC()` (since these are currently basically the only things you can do with audio), and then stumble into this situation.

Author: Regarding the picture, can we use something from a research article, instead of doing it from scratch? We can always reference the article.

   * If the audio signal was loaded as an integral type, you can either
     change the loading code to load directly into a floating-point type matrix, or
     use conv_to to convert to a floating-point type, then scale the range to [-1, 1]

   * If the audio signal has multiple channels, the channels must be
     de-interleaved before calling `MFE()` with each column representing a separate
     channel.  This preserves spatial information (e.g., which sounds come from the
     left vs. right).  If spatial information is not needed, the channels can be
     mixed down to mono before processing (e.g., `mono = (left + right) / 2`).
     Both cases are demonstrated in the examples below.

> ### Functions Parameters:

Reviewer: I'd use an H4 for this header.  Also I'd just call it "Function Parameters".

|------------------|-------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | raw pcm audio samples.                                         |
| `mfe`            | `arma::mat` or other floating point matrix | _(n/a)_ | output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`.         |
| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | sample rate of the audio in hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`).        |
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | number of mel-spaced triangular filters. Typical range (`20` to `100`) |
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | window length in milliseconds.  Typical range (`20` to `40`)           |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | window hop (step) in milliseconds. Typical range (`5` to `20`)         |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | fft size; `0` means the number of points fed to fft is chosen automatically using the next power of 2 >= of the window length. Typical range (`256` to `4096`) |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | low frequency bound for the mel filterbank in hz. Typical range (`0` to `300`) |

> | `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | high frequency bound in hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range (`4000` to sampleRate / 2) |

Reviewer: I like the typical ranges in this table, but why are all the sentences lowercase?  Do you think you can fix that to match other tables in our documentation?

Author: Vim shortcut mistake to blame

Reviewer: I hit that key too regularly... still haven't figured out which one it is :smile:

Author: It is `u` in visualise mode after typing `v`. Sometimes I forget I am in v mode and I get into this situation.

---

Apply MFE filter with default parameters on voice signals:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::mat mfe;
mlpack::MFE(signal, mfe, opts.SampleRate());

std::cout << "MFE shape: " << mfe.n_rows << " x " << mfe.n_cols << std::endl;

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
(just removing an empty line)

```

Specifying a custom number of mel filters and frequency range:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::fmat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::fmat mfe;
// 80 mel filters, default window size, frequency range 300–8000 Hz.
mlpack::MFE(signal, mfe, opts.SampleRate(), 80, 25.0, 10.0, 0, 300.0,

>     8000.0);

Reviewer: I think it might be a good idea to just print the MFE shape here too.  That way a user can look at this example and the last one and see how the size of the result changes.

```

> A detailed example showing the average extracted energy per frequency bin:

Reviewer: This is a really nice example!  Is it finished?  It looks like there might be some debugging output you have here?  Some comments in the code might be helpful too, just to give a basic idea of what each block is trying to do.

Author: Yes, only left two old debugging outputs; I replaced them with the same outputs we have at MFCC. It should look consistent.

  arma::vec hzPoints(42);
  for (size_t i = 0; i < 42; ++i)
   hzPoints(i) = MelToHz(melPoints(i));

  std::cout << std::endl;
  std::cout << "Filter   Freq range (Hz)       Avg energy" << std::endl;
  std::cout << "------   -------------------   ----------" << std::endl;

  for (size_t i = 0; i < 40; ++i)
  {
    std::cout << "  " << std::setw(2) << i << "     "
              << std::setw(5) << std::fixed << std::setprecision(0)
              << hzPoints(i) << " – "
              << std::setw(5) << hzPoints(i + 2) << "       "
              << std::setw(8) << std::setprecision(2) << meanMFE(i);

    if (i == peakFilter)
      std::cout << "   <<< peak";
    else if (i == peakFilter - 1 || i == peakFilter + 1)
      std::cout << "   <<< adjacent";

    std::cout << std::endl;
  }
```

---

## MFCC

mlpack provides the `MFCC()` functions to extract standard audio
features from raw PCM data loaded with [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).  Similar to MFE, MFCC
output can be used as input to machine learning models. Note that, since MFCC
coefficient are decorrelated, it can be combined with several distance-based 
machine learning algorithms (e.g., KNN, KMeans) or probabilitic algorithms

> (e.g., GMM, HMM).

Reviewer: Can you link these to the algorithms we already have documented?  (I know that is not everything.)

MFCC is a superset of MFE, the MFE pipeline produces the first step as an
intermidiate representation, and a single additional DCT step to generate MFCC

> coefficients.

Reviewer: Here's a revision suggestion, see what you think:

```
Computing MFCCs is done by first computing Mel-filterbank energies with [`MFE()`](#mfe), and then performing a discrete cosine transform (DCT) on the result.
```

Author: Looks good

 
   * `signals` input matrix contains a columm wise represented signals.
   
   * `mfcc` output matrix of shape `(numCoeffs x numWindows)`

   * `sampleRate` provided by `AudioOptions` after loading audio data.
    parameters.

   * if the audio signal was loaded as an integral type, you can either
     change the loading code to load directly into a floating-point type matrix, or
     use conv_to to convert to a floating-point type, then scale the range to [-1, 1]

   * If the audio signal has multiple channels, the channels must be
     de-interleaved before calling `MFCC()` with each column representing a separate
     channel.  This preserves spatial information (e.g., which sounds come from the
     left vs. right).  If spatial information is not needed, the channels can be
     mixed down to mono before processing (e.g., `mono = (left + right) / 2`).
     Both cases are demonstrated in the examples below.

   * `numCoeffs` must be less than or equal to `numMelFilters`.  The
     DCT compresses `numMelFilters` log-mel energies down to `numCoeffs` cepstral
     coefficients — it cannot produce more coefficients than there are input

>      values.

Reviewer: I would suggest the same kind of overhaul here as for MFE().

Author: Could you elaborate more? Probably the GitHub diff is not showing the correct location

Reviewer: I am referring to this comment from earlier in my review: https://github.com/mlpack/mlpack/pull/4144#discussion_r3182188504

| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | window hop (step) in milliseconds.  Typical range (`5` to `20`)            |
| `nFft`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | fft size; `0` means the number of points fed to fft is chosen automatically using the next power of 2 >= of the window length. Typical range (`256` to `4096`) |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | low frequency bound for the mel filterbank in hz. Typical range (`0` to `300`)      |
| `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | high frequency bound in hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range (`4000` to sampleRate / 2) |

---

Extract 13 MFCCs from a WAV file.

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::mat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate());

// mfcc has a shape of 13 x numWindows.
std::cout << "MFCC shape: " << mfcc.n_rows << " x " << mfcc.n_cols
    << std::endl;
```

Extract 20 MFCCs with 80 mel filters from an MP3 file:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/fifths.mp3
arma::fmat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::MP3;

> mlpack::Load("fifths.mp3", signal, opts);

Reviewer: This is a two-channel audio file; what about de-interleaving?  Should we also give better examples in MFE that show deinterleaving/combining channels?

Author: I would l like to add that example later. This one is a mono channel. The only file we have with two channels is collectathon.wav or mp3

Reviewer: You are right, I checked with `ffprobe`.  I wonder why `mplayer` says it's two-channel?  Here is some output:

```
$ mplayer fifths.mp3
...
AUDIO: 48000 Hz, 2 ch, s16le, 320.0 kbit/20.83% (ratio: 40000->192000)
...
```

Anyway, mplayer must be wrong there, I'd trust ffprobe over that.

arma::fmat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate(), 20, 80);
```

MFCC with custom parameters:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::fmat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::fmat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate(), 13, 26, 25.0, 10.0, 512, 300.0,
    3400.0);
```

Analyse the 13 MFCC coefficients extracted from loading a sine wav signal and
what each one captures:

```c++

>   arma::mat signal;

Reviewer: This example is all indented---can you revert it to be left-justified?  The indentation will cause it to render a little weird.  (It is a really nice example, also!)

  AudioOptions opts = Fatal + WAV;
  Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

  std::cout << "Loaded: " << signal.n_rows << " samples, "
      << opts.SampleRate() << " Hz, "
      << opts.Channels() << " channel(s)" << std::endl;

  arma::mat mfcc;
  MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate());

  std::cout << "MFCC shape: " << mfcc.n_rows << " x " << mfcc.n_cols
      << " (coefficients x windows)" << std::endl;

  arma::vec meanMFCC = arma::mean(mfcc, 1);

  std::cout << std::endl;

>   std::cout << "Coeff   Avg value    What it captures" << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  std::cout << "Coeff   Avg value    What it captures (roughly)" << std::endl;
```
I think it's important to point out that the descriptions are only rough descriptions and not precise.

# Signal processing

mlpack provides several signal processing techniques that allows to extract
features from stationary and non-stationary signals:

* _Decomposition_:
    - [`EMD()`](#emd) (Empirical Mode Decomposition): adaptively decomposes a 1D signal into a set of Intrinsic Mode
 Functions (IMFs) plus a residue.
    - [`EEMD():`](#eemd) (Ensemble EMD): wraps `EMD()` to output more robust IMFs by using ensemble
      approach.

* _Feature Extraction_: 
    - [`MFE()`](#mfe) (Mel-Frequency Energy): log-scaled energies from a bank of
   triangular filters spaced on the mel scale
    - [`MFCC()`](#mfcc) (Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients): a compact representation
   obtained by applying a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) to the MFE output.

## EMD

mlpack provides Empirical Mode Decomposition (`EMD`) to process signals
for training and testing.  This can be used for signal monitoring pipelines
in nonlinear and nonstationary problems.

The `EMD()` function can be used to extract Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMFs)
from a uniformly sampled periodic signal:

> #### `EMD()` Parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This seems to be leftover as a merge artifact; it isn't there in the master branch.

Author: Correct

- `EMD(signal, imfs, residue, maxImfs = 10, maxSiftIter = 50, tol = 1e-3)`
   * `signal` is a [column vector](../../matrices.md#representing-data-in-mlpack) containing the 1D signal
     data (e.g. `arma::vec`); the sequence must be uniformly sampled.

   * `imfs` is a [matrix](../../matrices.md#representing-data-in-mlpack) that will be modified to contain
     the extracted IMFs. It will have shape `N x K`, where `N` is the length
     of `signal` and `K` is the number of extracted IMFs.

   * `residue` is a column vector (of length `N`) that will be modified to
     contain the final residual signal after extracting the IMFs.

   * `maxImfs` (of type `size_t`) is the maximum number of IMFs to extract.

   * `maxSiftIter` (of type `size_t`) is the maximum sifting iterations per IMF.

   * `tol` (`double`) is the stopping tolerance used on sifting iterations.

   ***NOTES:***

>    * The original signal can be reconstructed as the sum of the imfs and residue. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * The original signal can be reconstructed as the sum of the IMFs and residue. 
```

}
```

#### See also:

 * [Empirical Mode Decomposition on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert%E2%80%93Huang_transform#Empirical_mode_decomposition)
 * [EMD for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analysis](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998RSPSA.454..903H/abstract) (original EMD paper)

## EEMD

The `EEMD()` function wraps [`EMD()`](#emd) to produce more robust IMFs
by running EMD many times on the signal with independent white noise added
to each trial, then averaging the results. The added noise reduces mode mixing
and cancels out in the average.

- `EEMD(signal, imfs, residue, ensSize = 100, noiseStrength = 0.2, maxImfs = 10, maxSiftIter = 50, tol = 1e-3)`

   * `ensSize` (of type `size_t`) is the number of members in the ensemble
    (that is the number of `EMD()` runs to be averaged).

   * `noiseStrength` (of type `double`) is the fraction of the signal standard
   deviation used as the standard deviation of the added white noise in each
    `EMD()` run (i.e. 0.1 means 10% of signal standard deviation).

   * `signal`, `imfs`,  `residue`, `maxImfs`, `maxSiftIter`, and `tol` are
     defined in the classical `EMD()` implementation.

   ***NOTES:***

>    * The original signal **cannot** be reconstructed as the sum of the imfs and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * The original signal **cannot** be reconstructed as the sum of the IMFs and
```

   IMFs in post-processing (e.g., using an energy-fraction threshold).

   * The number of returned IMFs is bounded between `0` and `maxImfs`.
     The algorithm returns only as many IMFs as can actually be extracted from
     the input signal.

Example using `EEMD` on a time-varying signal `S` (shown in above EMD figure).

```c++
const arma::uword N = 3000;
const double tMin = 0.0;
const double tMax = arma::datum::pi;
arma::vec time = arma::linspace(tMin, tMax, N);

// signal = sin(20*T*(1 + 0.2*T)) + T**2 + sin(13*T)
// see figure above in the EMD documentation
arma::vec signal =
    arma::sin( 20.0 * time % (1.0 + 0.2 * time) ) +
    arma::square(time) + arma::sin(13.0 * time);

arma::mat imfs;
arma::vec residue;

// Use 100 ensemble members, 0.15 noise strength, 10 IMFs, 50 sifts per IMF, tol = 1e-2
mlpack::EEMD(signal, imfs, residue, 100, 0.15, 10, 50, 1e-2);
```

#### See also:

 * [Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition](https://perso.ens-lyon.fr/patrick.flandrin/EEMD.pdf) (original EEMD paper)
 * [EMD for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analysis](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1998RSPSA.454..903H/abstract) (original EMD paper)

## MFE

> mlpack provides the `MFE()` functions to extract standard audio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mlpack provides the `MFE()` function to extract standard audio
```

features from raw PCM data loaded with [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).  These features are
used as input to machine learning models for speech recognition, speaker identification,

> keyword spotting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
features from raw PCM data loaded with [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).  These features can be
used as input to machine learning models for speech recognition, speaker identification,
keyword spotting, and other tasks.
```

   * Extract log-Mel filterbank energies from windows of audio in `signals`, storing the result in `mfe`.

   * `signals` should be a matrix with floating-point elements and shape `numSamples` x `numSignals`,
      and `mfe` will be set to shape `numMelFilters` x `(numWindows * numSignals)`.
     - To perform `MFE()` on non-floating point audio signals, first convert the data to a
       floating-point matrix type (e.g. using [`arma::conv_to`](https://arma.sourceforge.net/docs.html#conv_to)).

   * `sampleRate` can be set using the members of an [`AudioOptions`](../../load_save.md#audiooptions)
      populated during a call to [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).

   ***NOTES:***

   * If the audio signal has multiple channels, the channels must be
     de-interleaved before calling `MFE()` with each column representing a separate
     channel.  This preserves spatial information (e.g., which sounds come from the
     left vs. right).  If spatial information is not needed, the channels can be
     mixed down to mono before processing (e.g., `mono = (left + right) / 2`).

>      Both cases are demonstrated in the examples below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The examples don't actually show this functionality, so we shouldn't include this sentence. If you adapt the examples later, that's great, but I don't want to commit this line because it is currently not correct.

MFE is computed using the following steps.  The figure below shows the application of MFE to a 440 Hz sine wave signal.

 - *(a)* Each individual input signal should have amplitude in the range `[-1.0, 1.0]`.
 - *(b)* Cut the signal into overlapping frames tapered by a Hamming window to prevent spectral leakage.
 - *(c)* Apply the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) to each data window to produce a short-term spectrum.
 - *(d)* Multiply each STFT frame with the Mel filterbank, which consists of log-spaced triangular filters.
 - *(e)* Take the log of the filter bins to produce the Mel filter energies.

<p align="center">
  <img src="../../../img/mfe_pipeline.png" alt="MFE implementation">
</p>

#### Function Parameters:

|     **name**     |  **type**   |   **default**  | **description**                                         |
|------------------|-------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------|

> | `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Raw pcm audio samples.                                 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Raw PCM audio samples.                                 |
```

I make the same vim key error all the time and hit whatever key changes everything to lowercase... you are not the only one 😄

| `mfe`            | `arma::mat` or other floating point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`. |

> | `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Sample rate of the audio in hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`).        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Sample rate of the audio in Hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`).        |
```

> | `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | Number of mel-spaced triangular filters. Typical range (`20` to `100`) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | Number of Mel-spaced triangular filters. Typical range (`20` to `100`) |
```

        << " (filters x windows)." << std::endl;

arma::vec meanMFE = arma::mean(mfe, 1);

size_t peakFilter = meanMFE.index_max();
float peakVal = meanMFE.max();

size_t nFFT = 512;
float highFreq = opts.SampleRate() / 2.0f;
float melLow = mlpack::HzToMel(0.0f);
float melHigh = mlpack::HzToMel(highFreq);
arma::vec melPoints = arma::linspace<arma::vec>(melLow, melHigh, 42);
arma::vec hzPoints(42);
for (size_t i = 0; i < 42; ++i)
hzPoints(i) = mlpack::MelToHz(melPoints(i));

std::cout << std::endl;
std::cout << "Filter   Freq range (Hz)       Avg energy" << std::endl;
std::cout << "------   -------------------   ----------" << std::endl;

for (size_t i = 0; i < 40; ++i)
{
  std::cout << "  " << std::setw(2) << i << "     "
            << std::setw(5) << std::fixed << std::setprecision(0)
            << hzPoints(i) << " – "
            << std::setw(5) << hzPoints(i + 2) << "       "
            << std::setw(8) << std::setprecision(2) << meanMFE(i);

  if (i == peakFilter)
    std::cout << "   <<< peak";
  else if (i == peakFilter - 1 || i == peakFilter + 1)
    std::cout << "   <<< adjacent";

  std::cout << std::endl;
}
```

---

## MFCC

> mlpack provides the `MFCC()` functions to extract standard audio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mlpack provides the `MFCC()` function to extract standard audio
```

features from raw PCM data loaded with [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).  Similar to MFE, MFCC
output can be used as input to machine learning models. Note that, since MFCC

> coefficient are decorrelated, it can be combined with several distance-based 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
coefficients are decorrelated, they can be used with distance-based 
```

machine learning algorithms (e.g., [KNN](../../methods/knn.md),

> [KMeans](/src/mlpack/methods/kmeans/kmeans.hpp)) or probabilitic algorithms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[KMeans](/src/mlpack/methods/kmeans/kmeans.hpp)) or probabilistic algorithms
```

   * Extract Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients from windows of audio in `signals`, 
     storing the result in `mfcc`.

   * `signals` should be a matrix with floating-point elements and shape `numSamples` x `numSignals`,
      and `mfcc` will be set to shape `numCoeffs` x `(numWindows * numSignals)`.
     - To perform `MFE()` on non-floating point audio signals, first convert the data to a
       floating-point matrix type (e.g. using [`arma::conv_to`](https://arma.sourceforge.net/docs.html#conv_to)).

   * `sampleRate` can be set using the members of an [`AudioOptions`](../../load_save.md#audiooptions)
      populated during a call to [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).

   ***NOTES:***

   * If the audio signal has multiple channels, the channels must be
     de-interleaved before calling `MFCC()` with each column representing a separate
     channel.  This preserves spatial information (e.g., which sounds come from the
     left vs. right).  If spatial information is not needed, the channels can be
     mixed down to mono before processing (e.g., `mono = (left + right) / 2`).

>      Both cases are demonstrated in the examples below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The examples don't actually show this functionality, so we shouldn't include this sentence.  If you adapt the examples later, that's great, but I don't want to commit this line because it is currently not correct.

Author: Totally agreed, this is left over, we can add it later, and it is on my list

   * `numCoeffs` must be less than or equal to `numMelFilters`.  The
     DCT compresses `numMelFilters` log-mel energies down to `numCoeffs` cepstral

>      coefficients, it cannot produce more coefficients than there are input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     coefficients; it cannot produce more coefficients than there are input
```

     values.

> MFCC is computed using the following steps.  The figure below shows the application of MFE to a 440 Hz sine wave signal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MFCC is computed using the following steps.  The figure below shows the application of MFCC to a 440 Hz sine wave signal.
```

 - *(a)* Each individual input signal should have amplitude in the range `[-1.0, 1.0]`.
 - *(b)* Cut the signal into overlapping frames tapered by a Hamming window to prevent spectral leakage.
 - *(c)* Apply the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) to each data window to produce a short-term spectrum.
 - *(d)* Multiply each STFT frame with the Mel filterbank, which consists of log-spaced triangular filters.
 - *(e)* Take the log of the filter bins to produce the Mel filter energies.

>  - *(f)* Multiplying by a discrete cosine transform (DCT) matrix on top gives MFCC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - *(f)* Multiplying by a discrete cosine transform (DCT) matrix gives MFCC.
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="../../../img/mfcc_pipeline.png" alt="MFCC implementation">
</p>

#### Function Parameters:

|     **name**     |  **type**   |   **default**  | **description**                                  |
|------------------|-------------|----------------|--------------------------------------------------|

> | `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Raw pcm audio samples.                                  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Raw PCM audio samples.                                  |
```

| `mfcc`           | `arma::mat` or other floating point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`.  |

> | `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Sample rate of the audio in hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Sample rate of the audio in Hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`). |
```

| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | Window length in milliseconds. Typical range `20` to `40`.                |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | Window hop (step) in milliseconds.  Typical range `5` to `20`.            |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | FFT size; `0` will use the next power of 2 greater than or equal to the window length.  Powers of 2 are more efficient.  Typical range `256` to `4096`. |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | Low frequency bound for the Mel filterbank in Hz. Typical range `0` to `300`.      |
| `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | High frequency bound in Hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range `4000` to `sampleRate / 2`. |

---

Extract 13 MFCCs from a WAV file.

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::mat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate());

// mfcc has a shape of 13 x numWindows.
std::cout << "MFCC shape: " << mfcc.n_rows << " x " << mfcc.n_cols
    << "." << std::endl;
```

> Extract 20 MFCCs with 80 mel filters from an MP3 file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extract 20 MFCCs with 80 Mel filters from an MP3 file:
```

   * If the audio signal has multiple channels, the channels must be
     de-interleaved before calling `MFE()` with each column representing a separate
     channel.  This preserves spatial information (e.g., which sounds come from the
     left vs. right).  If spatial information is not needed, the channels can be
     mixed down to mono before processing (e.g., `mono = (left + right) / 2`).
     Both cases are demonstrated in the examples below.

mlpack's implementation of MFE algorithm is as follows:

  - Apply Short Fast Fourier Transform (STFT) to the signals, this is done by:
    1. Cuts the input signal into a set of overlapping windows (25 ms window, 10 ms hop). Figure (b)
    2. Multiply each window by Hamming Window function so the edges of each window tends to 0. This is done primarly to prevent spectral leakage). Figure (b)
    3. Fast Fourier Transorm (FFT) turns each frame from time domain into frequency domain. We take amplitutde per bin and the first part of the spectrum since it is mirrored. Figure (c)
  - Multiply bins by MelFilter banks. The filters are triangle shaped, using mel scale and are dense at low frequency and sparse at high frequency. Figure (d)

>   - Take the log in order to compress the dynamic range of energies to match how humans perceive loudness. Figure (e)

Reviewer: This is a nice explanation!  I think it could be better if you structured it like this, so that each bullet point matches a figure:

```
MFE is computed using the following steps.  The figure below shows the application of MFE to a 440 Hz sine wave signal.

 - *(a)* Each individual input signal should have amplitude in the range `[-1.0, 1.0]`.
 - *(b)* Compute overlapping windows of the input signal using a Hamming window.
 - *(c)* Apply the Short-Time Fourier Transform (STFT) to each data window to produce a short-term spectrum.
 - *(d)* Multiply each STFT frame with the Mel filterbank, which consists of log-spaced triangular filters.
 - *(e)* Take the log of the filter bins to produce the Mel filter energies.
```

This is just an idea that I borrowed from the EMD documentation above.  Maybe the wording is not perfect, feel free to revise it if it needs changes.  I thought it was good to keep it simpler though, rather than diving too deep into the details; the "See also" links can be used for a user who wants to deeply understand exactly what is going on.

Author: (b) is not quite correct; what is happening is that we are cutting the signals in (b) manually and then applying a Hamming Window to make the signal tend to zero on the extremes. Let me improve the wording for these two bullet points; apart from that, it looks great.

|------------------|-------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Raw pcm audio samples.                                 |
| `mfe`            | `arma::mat` or other floating point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`. |
| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Sample rate of the audio in hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`).        |
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | Number of mel-spaced triangular filters. Typical range (`20` to `100`) |
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | Window length in milliseconds.  Typical range (`20` to `40`)           |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | Window hop (step) in milliseconds. Typical range (`5` to `20`)         |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | FFT size; `0` means the number of points fed to fft is chosen automatically using the next power of 2 >= of the window length. Typical range (`256` to `4096`) |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | Low frequency bound for the mel filterbank in hz. Typical range (`0` to `300`) |

> | `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | High frequency bound in hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range (`4000` to sampleRate / 2) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | Window length in milliseconds.  Typical range `20` to `40`.           |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | Window hop (step) in milliseconds. Typical range `5` to `20`.         |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | FFT size; `0` will use the next power of 2 greater than or equal to the window length.  Powers of 2 are more efficient.  Typical range `256` to `4096`. |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | Low frequency bound for the Mel filterbank in Hz. Typical range `0` to `300`. |
| `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | High frequency bound in Hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range `4000` to `sampleRate / 2`. |
```
Just some small grammar fixes, and I was able to shorten the FFT size definition... let me know what you think.

---

Apply MFE filter with default parameters on voice signals:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::mat mfe;
mlpack::MFE(signal, mfe, opts.SampleRate());

std::cout << "MFE shape: " << mfe.n_rows << " x " << mfe.n_cols << std::endl;
```

> Specifying a custom number of mel filters and frequency range:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifying a custom number of Mel filters and frequency range:
```

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::fmat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::fmat mfe;
// 80 mel filters, default window size, frequency range 300–8000 Hz.
mlpack::MFE(signal, mfe, opts.SampleRate(), 80, 25.0, 10.0, 0, 300.0,
    8000.0);

std::cout << "MFE shape: " << mfe.n_rows << " x " << mfe.n_cols
        << " (filters x windows)" << std::endl;
```

A detailed example showing the average extracted energy per frequency bin:

```c++
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

std::cout << "Loaded: " << signal.n_rows << " samples, "
  << opts.SampleRate() << " Hz, "

>   << opts.Channels() << " channel(s)" << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  << opts.Channels() << " channel(s)." << std::endl;
```

arma::mat mfe;
mlpack::MFE(signal, mfe, opts.SampleRate());

std::cout << "MFE shape: " << mfe.n_rows << " x " << mfe.n_cols

>         << " (filters x windows)" << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        << " (filters x windows)." << std::endl;
```
(I know how deeply pedantic this is, I'm just trying to make it match other examples.)

arma::vec meanMFE = arma::mean(mfe, 1);

size_t peakFilter = meanMFE.index_max();
float peakVal = meanMFE.max();

size_t nFFT = 512;
float highFreq = opts.SampleRate() / 2.0f;
float melLow = mlpack::HzToMel(0.0f);
float melHigh = mlpack::HzToMel(highFreq);
arma::vec melPoints = arma::linspace<arma::vec>(melLow, melHigh, 42);
arma::vec hzPoints(42);
for (size_t i = 0; i < 42; ++i)
hzPoints(i) = mlpack::MelToHz(melPoints(i));

std::cout << std::endl;
std::cout << "Filter   Freq range (Hz)       Avg energy" << std::endl;
std::cout << "------   -------------------   ----------" << std::endl;

for (size_t i = 0; i < 40; ++i)
{
std::cout << "  " << std::setw(2) << i << "     "
          << std::setw(5) << std::fixed << std::setprecision(0)
          << hzPoints(i) << " – "
          << std::setw(5) << hzPoints(i + 2) << "       "
          << std::setw(8) << std::setprecision(2) << meanMFE(i);

if (i == peakFilter)
  std::cout << "   <<< peak";
else if (i == peakFilter - 1 || i == peakFilter + 1)
  std::cout << "   <<< adjacent";

> std::cout << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
  std::cout << "  " << std::setw(2) << i << "     "
            << std::setw(5) << std::fixed << std::setprecision(0)
            << hzPoints(i) << " – "
            << std::setw(5) << hzPoints(i + 2) << "       "
            << std::setw(8) << std::setprecision(2) << meanMFE(i);

  if (i == peakFilter)
    std::cout << "   <<< peak";
  else if (i == peakFilter - 1 || i == peakFilter + 1)
    std::cout << "   <<< adjacent";

  std::cout << std::endl;
```

}
```

---

## MFCC

mlpack provides the `MFCC()` functions to extract standard audio
features from raw PCM data loaded with [`Load()`](../../load_save.md).  Similar to MFE, MFCC
output can be used as input to machine learning models. Note that, since MFCC
coefficient are decorrelated, it can be combined with several distance-based 
machine learning algorithms (e.g., [KNN](../../methods/knn.md),
[KMeans](/src/mlpack/methods/kmeans/kmeans.hpp)) or probabilitic algorithms
(e.g., [GMM](/src/mlpack/methods/gmm/gmm.hpp), [HMM](/src/mlpack/methods/hmm/hmm.hpp)).

 - `MFCC(signals, mfcc, sampleRate, numCoeffs, numMelFilters, windowLength,

>    windowStep, nFFT, lowFreq, highFreq)`

Reviewer: This needs to be on one line to render correctly.  Can you add the default values here too, just like you did for MFE?

| `signals`        | `arma::mat` or other floating-point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Raw pcm audio samples.                                  |
| `mfcc`           | `arma::mat` or other floating point matrix | _(n/a)_ | Output matrix of shape `(numMelFilters x numWindows)`.  |
| `sampleRate`     | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Sample rate of the audio in hz (e.g. `16000`, `44100`). |
| `numCoeff`       | `size_t`    | _(n/a)_ | Number of cepstral coefficients.                        |
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | Number of mel-spaced triangular filters.  Typical range (`20` to `100`)    |
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | Window length in milliseconds. Typical range (`20` to `40`)                |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | Window hop (step) in milliseconds.  Typical range (`5` to `20`)            |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | FFT size; `0` means the number of points fed to fft is chosen automatically using the next power of 2 >= of the window length. Typical range (`256` to `4096`) |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | Low frequency bound for the mel filterbank in hz. Typical range (`0` to `300`)      |

> | `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | High frequency bound in hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range (`4000` to sampleRate / 2) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `numMelFilters`  | `size_t`    | `40`    | Number of Mel-spaced triangular filters.  Typical range `20` to `100`.    |
| `windowLength`   | `float`     | `25.0`  | Window length in milliseconds. Typical range `20` to `40`.                |
| `windowStep`     | `float`     | `10.0`  | Window hop (step) in milliseconds.  Typical range `5` to `20`.            |
| `nFFT`           | `size_t`    | `0`     | FFT size; `0` will use the next power of 2 greater than or equal to the window length.  Powers of 2 are more efficient.  Typical range `256` to `4096`. |
| `lowFreq`        | `float`     | `0.0`   | Low frequency bound for the Mel filterbank in Hz. Typical range `0` to `300`.      |
| `highFreq`       | `float`     | `0.0`   | High frequency bound in Hz; `0` means `sampleRate / 2`. Typical range `4000` to `sampleRate / 2`. |
```

---

Extract 13 MFCCs from a WAV file.

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::mat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate());

// mfcc has a shape of 13 x numWindows.
std::cout << "MFCC shape: " << mfcc.n_rows << " x " << mfcc.n_cols

>     << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    << "." << std::endl;
```

```

Extract 20 MFCCs with 80 mel filters from an MP3 file:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/fifths.mp3
arma::fmat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::MP3;
mlpack::Load("fifths.mp3", signal, opts);

arma::fmat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate(), 20, 80);
```

MFCC with custom parameters:

```c++
// See https://datasets.mlpack.org/sine.wav
arma::fmat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

arma::fmat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate(), 13, 26, 25.0, 10.0, 0, 300.0,
    3400.0);
```

Analyse the 13 MFCC coefficients extracted from loading a sine wav signal and
what each one captures:

```c++
arma::mat signal;
mlpack::AudioOptions opts = mlpack::Fatal + mlpack::WAV;
mlpack::Load("sine.wav", signal, opts);

std::cout << "Loaded: " << signal.n_rows << " samples, "
  << opts.SampleRate() << " Hz, "

>   << opts.Channels() << " channel(s)" << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  << opts.Channels() << " channel(s)." << std::endl;
```

arma::mat mfcc;
mlpack::MFCC(signal, mfcc, opts.SampleRate());

std::cout << "MFCC shape: " << mfcc.n_rows << " x " << mfcc.n_cols

>   << " (coefficients x windows)" << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  << " (coefficients x windows)." << std::endl;
```

arma::vec meanMFCC = arma::mean(mfcc, 1);

std::cout << std::endl;
std::cout << "Coeff   Avg value    What it captures (roughly)" << std::endl;
std::cout << "-----   ---------    ----------------" << std::endl;

> const char* descriptions[] = {
> "Overall energy (loudness)",
> "Spectral tilt (low vs high freq balance)",
> "Spectral curvature (middle vs edges)",
> "Two-bump structure (formant separation)",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Finer spectral shape",
> "Fine spectral detail",
> "Finest spectral detail"
> };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const char* descriptions[] = {
    "Overall energy (loudness)",
    "Spectral tilt (low vs high freq balance)",
    "Spectral curvature (middle vs edges)",
    "Two-bump structure (formant separation)",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Finer spectral shape",
    "Fine spectral detail",
    "Finest spectral detail"
};
```

for (size_t i = 0; i < mfcc.n_rows; ++i)
{
std::cout << "  c[" << std::setw(2) << i << "]  "
    << std::setw(10) << std::fixed << std::setprecision(2) << meanMFCC(i)

>     << "    " << descriptions[i] << std::endl;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  std::cout << "c[" << std::setw(2) << i << "]  "
      << std::setw(10) << std::fixed << std::setprecision(2) << meanMFCC(i)
      << "    " << descriptions[i] << std::endl;
```

When I ran this locally, the spacing was off just a little bit:

```
Coeff   Avg value    What it captures (roughly)
-----   ---------    ----------------
  c[ 0]      -35.77    Overall energy (loudness)
  c[ 1]       57.65    Spectral tilt (low vs high freq balance)
  c[ 2]        5.77    Spectral curvature (middle vs edges)
  c[ 3]      -27.71    Two-bump structure (formant separation)
  c[ 4]      -31.27    Finer spectral shape
  c[ 5]      -21.78    Finer spectral shape
  c[ 6]       -1.89    Finer spectral shape
  c[ 7]       14.03    Finer spectral shape
  c[ 8]       20.82    Finer spectral shape
  c[ 9]       14.77    Finer spectral shape
  c[10]        1.85    Finer spectral shape
  c[11]      -11.17    Fine spectral detail
  c[12]      -16.45    Finest spectral detail
```

So I just removed the spacing at the start of the line.
